This is the last break in the narrative that glorifies and gigantifies
the beauties and heros of legendary Ireland. The "hero" analog of the
Citizen hasn't got any story coming.

The most striking thing  is the list of the hero's seastones,
engraved with signs of other Irish heros -- a list which grows
to include Muhammad, Gautama Buddhath, Ben Franklin and Cleopatara.
Before that is the description

In the attributes of the gigantic hero, "longheaded" stands
out as politically loaded.  Roundheads and Longheads -- in
archaelogy terms, Europeans used to have longer skulls, which
became rounder during the middle ages.

Giving the parenthicized, italicized, Linnean identification of the
mountain gorse is a playful break in the diction of legend.  Skeat, by
the way, traces "Gorse" back to a scandanivian word for "grow", with
"ro" sound changing to "or".

Drawing attention to the colors of nostril hairs might set up some
unpleasantly specific thoughts about that potential lark nesting
ground; a bit reminiscent of the minute examination Swift's narrator
gives of the giant queen in Gulliver's travels.

A question: to what cave does "still lotier walls of the cave" refer?
Joyce told us about a cavity (hero's mouth).  If the tower is lofty,
and nearby walls are still loftier, there might be some kind of
light-under-a- bushel joke, or the description could refer to another
shape.  The original Polyphemous dwelt in a cave, but none is
described here.

About lichenn purple, a long aside in a separate post.

The girdle of seasons here heros gathered- two are probably meant
vulgarly The Man in the Gap, The Woman Who Didn’t).  Savourneen
Deelish is the name of a popular song, from irish "s a mhuirnin dilis"
(http://www.fresnostate.edu/folklore/ballads/Moyl173.html).  That
particular one sounds like a joke to me, with childish "Deelish"
shortening of deicious side by side with "Savour"; it probably
occurred to Joyce also.  Muhammad is one of the non-Irsish claimed as an
Irish hero; later in the chapter the term Mahound, which I first
encountered in Rushdie, is used.  Saints Fursa and Saint Brendan are
Irish Monastics.

"acuminated" means sharpening to a point and is not considered rare
or obsolete by dictionaries I've seen.

The labored breathing of the hero's dog draws attention back to his
analog in Kiernan, and is teh last we hear of the giant.


-----


lichen purple -- with licen and urine you can make a purple dye.  To digress
on purples:  Here is a spectrum of names for the hues: 
(    archil  
    orchil  
    orcein  
    litmus  
    cudbear  
    persio  
    La Parelle  
    La pourpre Français  


http://www.ravensgard.org/gerekr/Orchil.html

"Take one pound of the Orselle of the Levant, very clean; moisten it
with a little urine; add to this sal-ammoniac, sal-gemmae ("sel
terrestre et fossile"), and saltpetre, of each two ounces; pound them
well, mix them together, and let them remain so during twelve days,
stirring them twice a day; and then to keep the herb constantly
moist, add a little urine, and in this situation let it remain eight
days longer, continuing to stir it; you afterwards add a pound and a
half of pot-ash well pounded, and a pint and a half of stale
urine. Let it remain still eight days longer, stirring it as usual;
after which you add the same quantity of urine, and at the expiration
of five or six days, two drachms of arsenic; it will then be fit for
use."

Meanwhile, in the "backwaters" of medieval Europe, notably Scandinavia
and northern Britain, orchil-producing lichens were abundant. Was the
use of them known? Could the Vikings have worn fuchsia? Indications
are that they could. A red lichen dye called "lacmus" was being
exported from Norway to Germany and England by the early fourteenth
century. Annette Kok in her history of orchil dyes also speculates
that the practice of making and using orchil never quite died out in
Gaul. Federico Oricellari was certainly not the only "discoverer" of
orchil dye, but he and his fellow Italians get the credit as its great
popularizers.



vocabulary  
ell  
gorse  
bristle  
tawny  
trews  
Balbriggan  



