The narrator and Joe Hynes comes into the bar, and trade jocular
raillery with the citizen.  Joe's a newspaperman (Ivy Day in the
Comittee Room; in 3 shillings debt to Bloom established in Eumaeus).
The narrator is a debt collector.  The citizen is a nationalist, based
on a real-life character.

Looking JJ Digital Archive, there are few changes in this section thru
the drafts.

"So we turned into" -- don't ignore the simple jokes; the transmution of
chartacter into scene.  By narrative magicpower Joyce turns these two into
a scene.


"waiting for what the sky would drop" is like "Strange and Wonderful", a bit of
received  colorful speech, elegant phrasing, that the narrator at least deploys
aptly. 

"How's the old heart, citizen", and the response: "Never better" is a
dig by Joyce. In the citizens self-diagnosis, the literal upshot (a
noun as pertinent as any to the one time shot-putter as any), assuming
a figurative usage of "heart" hardly unprecendented in the oftjeering
author's preceding pages, is that those qualities collectively denoted
by heart, as kindness, compassion, sympathy, helpfullness, are not only
alien to his emotional and spiritual terrain now, but would have been
non-citizens there at any time.


Vocablary:

confab -- Confabulate is to talk together, one of the still in use
words that shows up in Blounts Glossographia; *fabula* in Latin either
a discourse or a tale.  Interesting that it means "talk together" and
the usage here is "a great confab with himself"


opinion -- nothing surprising in the etymology here but Skeat (1888) says
"opine" is not much used; to me it seems a common word.  Ngrams graph shows
it in local trough in 1888 but declined thereater.

gloryhole -- Green's dictionary (not around for Joyce) says that
the ultimate definition is from *glaur*, to make muddy.  "lutulent"
is a later-occuring word in oxen that means muddy, "downwardtending lutulent
reality" occurs in the same sentence as "citizen".  But let us
pass over that as perhaps uninteresting and if not, to recapture our
interest at some later date.

cruiskeen lawn  A little bottle, Gifford.  Irish.  "Cruse" is english for
a pot, it comes up a lot in Chaucer, Alchemist's Assistant's tale.

blue paper Gifford says it's a summons. Why would you get a summons
about a license?  Near to "Blue Moldy"

Santry Sean Triabh, "old tribe" Skeat: from there having been three
families in ancient rome (Ramnes, Tites and Luceres), tri+bus, where
"bus" is family, from BHU, to be.  Near Santry was a site where many
rebels were killed in the Rebellion of 1798.

constabulary -- Royal Irsh Constabulary; police force outside of Dublin;
"Royal" the aegis of the British monarchy.

citizen -- The inhabitant of a city; a Roman idea

codding -- [Green's dictionary of slang](https://greensdictofslang.com/entry/wwlpceq) cites examples in just this sense, thru 1997, startig with Portrait of
The Artist as a young man.

*a chara*  Friend/dear -- is this used in this way?  What I see on
the ne suggests it's a term used mostly in written address.

